Added docs/REST-API/18-PCL-Overview.md (#16)
PagerDuty/developer-docs: docs/REST-API/18-PCL-Overview.md

# PCL Overview

> The PagerDuty Condition Language (PCL) gives Event Orchestrations the power of boolean expressions more powerful than are available with rulesets. For example, with PCL, you can now define an expression like:

Author: I will apply and backport.

During evaluation, a sub-expression might not be able to evaluate successfully. This will result in an evaluation warning but will _not_ prevent the expression from being evaluated as a whole. See [Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation] for more details.

### Precedence

PCL expressions are made up of boolean sub-expressions and the final expression must return a boolean value. Sub-expressions can be combined with `and`, `or`, and `not` to form more complex boolean expressions. When creating expressions, these precedence rules apply:

1. parenthesized expressions
2. built-in operations
3. custom functions
4. `not`
5. `and`
6. `or`

For example:

```
event.x > 5 and not event.y < 6 or event.z == 2
```

is treated the same as:

```
((event.x > 5) and (not (event.y < 6))) or (event.z == 2)
```

where:

```
event.x > 5 and (not event.y < 6 or event.z == 2)
```

is treated like:

```
(event.x > 5) and ((not (event.y < 6)) or (event.z == 2))
```

### Paths

> A PCL expression is evaluated within a context. This context defines a set of variable bindings which PCL expressions have access to. For example, in the above precedence examples, the context contains a binding of `event` to an object which has fields named `'x'`, `'y'`, and `'z'`. Paths are used to access nested object and array structures.

Author: Hmm... we can use your change but I wanted this doc and the overview doc to have as few differences as possible to make it easier to keep them in sync. This change doesn't feel appropriate to backport. Any suggestions?

Object field names that do not conform to the identifier description above can be accessed using *bracket notation* by providing the field name as a single-quoted string inside square brackets, e.g. (`object['invalid identifier']`). Also, array elements can only currently be accessed using integers inside square brackets.

When a `path` is used in an expression, then it is evaluated to the value at that path in the data context before being used in the expression. If a final path doesn't exist, then `nil` is returned from the expression. The exception to this is the `exists` operation which checks whether or not the path exists in the context.

```json
{
  "data": {
    "payload": {
      "custom_details": {
        "system diagnosis": {
          "important_field": "This is an important value",
        }
      }
    },
    "headers": {
      "from": ["first", "second", "third", 4, 5]
    }
  }
}

data.payload.custom_details['system diagnosis'].important_field
  -> "This is an important value"

data.headers.from[0]
  -> "first"

data.attachments[1]
  -> nil

> ```

Author: Again, I'm trying to minimize differences between the two documents. Perhaps that isn't a useful goal.

> ```

Reviewer: > I'm trying to minimize differences between the two documents. Perhaps that isn't a useful goal.

Yeah, let's figure out how much we want to optimize for consistency between our internal & customer-facing docs! I'm starting a Slack thread to discuss more.

02:00 EST (UTC-0500) | 07:00 UTC | ✅ Yes |
02:30 EST (UTC-0500) | 07:30 UTC | ✅ Yes |
03:00 EST (UTC-0500) | 08:00 UTC | ✅ Yes |
03:30 EST (UTC-0500) | 08:30 UTC | ❌ No |

Another example similar to the above, but when DST starts.

**PCL Schedule: `Sun 01:30:00 to 03:15:00 America/New_York`**

Wall Clock Time | UTC Time | Matches Schedule? | Notes
-- | -- | -- | --
00:00 EST (UTC-0500) | 05:00 UTC | ❌ No |
00:30 EST (UTC-0500) | 05:30 UTC | ❌ No |
01:00 EST (UTC-0500) | 06:00 UTC | ❌ No |
01:30 EST (UTC-0500) | 06:30 UTC | ✅ Yes |
01:59 EST (UTC-0500) | 06:59 UTC | ✅ Yes |
DST begins: 03:00 EDT (UTC-0400) | 07:00 UTC | ✅ Yes | 2:00 AM skipped to 3:00 AM
03:15 EDT (UTC-0400) | 07:15 UTC | ✅ Yes |
03:30 EDT (UTC-0400) | 07:30 UTC | ❌ No |
04:00 EDT (UTC-0400) | 08:00 UTC | ❌ No |
04:30 EDT (UTC-0400) | 08:30 UTC | ❌ No |

#### Nil

A `nil` value represents the absense of any other value type.

### Built-in Operations

PCL has a variety of built-in operations:
- boolean operations: `and`, `or`, `not`
- numeric comparison operations: `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`
- string comparison operations: `matches [exactly]`, `matches part [exactly]`, `matches regex [exactly]`

> - other operations: `==`, `in`, `exists`, `now`

Reviewer: **Not a blocker**: We should probably mention _somewhere_ in this doc that some of the conditions (like `now >` and this one) are only available to EI customers, and maybe link to https://support.pagerduty.com/docs/event-intelligence

Author: Is it just `now`, `trigger_count`, and `resetting_trigger_count` that are only available to EI customer?

Reviewer: Yup! Exactly those. (And to be clear, restricts use of `now` for both for numeric _and_ schedule operators)

The operations described below will have an initial codeblock which shows the syntax of the operation. It will look something like:

```
[integer] < [integer] -> [boolean]
```

where to the left of the `->` we show the types of the arguments and the way the operation is used, and to the right of the `->`, we show the type of the return value. In both cases the type will be surrounded by `[]` to distinguish it from the operation name.

#### Boolean Operations

##### `not`

Returns the boolean `not` of the argument, i.e. the opposite boolean value to the one passed in as an argument.

```
not [boolean] -> [boolean]
```

Should be used in combination with the other operators.  Has higher precedence than the other boolean operators - use parentheses if you need to change the order of precdence.

```
{
  "data": {
    "foo: "code"
  }

> }

Author: The whitespace isn't maintained because the `json` was missing. I will fix and backport.

```

##### `and`

Returns the boolean `and` of the two arguments, i.e. returns `true` if both arguments are `true` and `false` otherwise.

```
[boolean] and [boolean] -> [boolean]
```

No conversions are performed; returns `false` if either arg is not a `boolean` type. Returns `false` if either args is a [Non-Boolean Evaluation]. Can be used with boolean literals or be used for creating nested expressions by joining the other operators. Has higher precedence than `or`, but lower predence than `not`.

##### `or`

Returns the boolean `or` of the two arguments, i.e. returns `false` if both arguments are `false` and `true` otherwise.

```
[boolean] or [boolean] -> [boolean]
```

No conversions are performed; returns `false` if either arg is not a `boolean`. Treats [Non-Boolean Evaluation] as `false`. Can be used with boolean literals or be used for creating nested expressions by joining the other operators.  Has lower precedence than `and`.

#### Numeric Comparison Operations

##### `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`

```
[datetime] >  [datetime] -> [boolean]
[datetime] >= [datetime] -> [boolean]
[datetime] <  [datetime] -> [boolean]

> [datetime] <= [datetime] -> [boolean]

Author: I consider it a bug that the user can only use now on the left, so I didn't want the documentation to reflect that. It's in the post-GA epic, so I figured it would be fixed soon enough to match the documentation: https://pagerduty.atlassian.net/browse/ORCA-3115

[number] >  [number] -> [boolean]
[number] >= [number] -> [boolean]
[number] <  [number] -> [boolean]
[number] <= [number] -> [boolean]
```

If both args are of type `datetime`, then evaluate the condition using datetimes. Datetimes further in the past are considered "less than" datetimes further in the future.

If both args are of type `number`, then evaluate the condition using numbers. If both are integers or both are floats, then the numbers will compare as expected. If one number is an integer and the other is a floating point number, then the rule described in [Note About Comparing Integers and Floats] applies.

Otherwise, returns a [Non-Boolean Evaluation], which will be evaluated like a `false` response.

#### String Comparison Operations

For the `matches`, `matches part`, and `matches regex` operations, comparisons are case-insensitive by default. Use the `exactly` modifier for a case-sensitive comparison.

For `matches` and `matches part` the following apply to both arguments. For `matches regex` the following applies to the first argument.

> 1. If either or both args are `nil`, returns a `false` Boolean Evaluation With Warnings. See [Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation].

Author: Hmm... Are you suggestion removing these references to `[Note About Warnings...]` without removing or modifying that section itself?

> 1. If either or both args are `nil`, returns a `false` Boolean Evaluation With Warnings. See [Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation].

Reviewer: Oh, I guess I just forgot/skipped adding a comment/suggestion to the that area. Let me add comments real quick...

##### `matches`

If the two strings match, then `true` is returned. Otherwise, returns `false`.

```
[string] matches [string] -> [boolean]
[string] matches exactly [string] -> [boolean]
```

"Matching" means that the arguments (after conversion) are equivalent character by character in their entirety, including any leading and trailing whitespace, taking into acccount the appropriate case-sensitivity.

Examples

```
'this is a test' matches 'This Is A Test' -> true
'trailing whitespace ' matches 'trailing whitespace' -> false
```

##### `matches part`

If the second argument is a part of the first argument, then `true` is returned. Otherwise, returns `false`.

```
[string] matches part [string] -> [boolean]
[string] matches part exactly [string] -> [boolean]
```

Examples

```
'[PROD] Disk space low' matches part 'prod' -> true
'[TEST] CPU usage high' matches part 'cpu' -> true
'[PROD] Network down' matches part 'disk' -> false
```

##### `matches regex`

If the second argument treated as a regex matches the first argument, then `true` is returned. Otherwise, returns `false`.

```
[string] matches regex [string] -> [boolean]
[string] matches regex exactly [string] -> [boolean]

> ```

Author: Ha. Will do and backport.

Case-insensitive by default via the `i` flag - removed when the `exactly` modifier is used.  The regex is also run with [the `s` and `m` flags](https://github.com/google/re2/wiki/Syntax#user-content-flags).  The `s` flag allows `.` to match newlines (`\n`) and the `m` flag turns on multi-line mode: `^` and `$` match begin/end line in addition to begin/end text. If you do not want these, they can be turned off by negating them:

```
(?-sm)myregex.*
```

If the `exactly` modifier and the `i` flag are both used, the `i` flag wins; flags in the regex have higher precdence than the `exactly` modifier.

#### Other Operations

##### `==`

Returns `true` if both arguments are equivalent and `false` otherwise.

```
[any type] == [any type] -> [boolean]
```

- When using `==` there will be no conversion of arguments
- Comparisons of strings will be case sensitive
- Floats and Integers are comparable. For example, `3.0 == 3` will result in a `true` evaluation. For more information, see the [Note About Comparing Integers and Floats]

> - Comparison of non-comparable types returns a `false` Boolean Evaluation With Warnings. See [Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation].

Author: Probably ok. No backport.

##### `in`

> Returns `true` when the first argument falls within the schedule specified by the second argument. Otherwise, returns `false`.

Author: Yeah, I also consider it a bug not to allow a datetime on the left, but that has less usefulness than allowing now to the right of `<`. So, I'll consider this change.

> Returns `true` when the first argument falls within the schedule specified by the second argument. Otherwise, returns `false`.

Author: Now that I look at this, I feel a little weird about making this a `now in` operation. Let me think about this a little.

```
now in [schedule] -> [boolean]
```

> The `in` operator is only for creating _scheduled_ conditions.  The first arg must be [`now`](#now). The second arg must be a `schedule`.

Author: So you're saying that we have a `now in` function from the point of view of the customer? I think that'll work, but I wouldn't backport it.

On Jan 3, 2022 at noon in Los Angeles:
```
now in Mon,Wed,Fri 08:00:00 to 18:00:00 America/Los_Angeles -> true

> ```

Author: I will add. Not sure if I'll backport since it refers to events.

> 

Author: I'll do that and backport.

##### `exists`

Returns `true` if the path exists in the context, `false` otherwise.

```
[path] exists -> [boolean]
```

Generally, a `path` used in an expression will evaluate to the value of the path in the context. In this case, `exists` checks to see if the path exists rather than retrieving the value at the path.

`exists` will still return `true` if the `path` exists even if the value at that path is set to `nil`.

```json
{
  "a": {
    "b": nil,
    "c": 5
  }
}
  
a.b exists -> true
a.b -> nil
a.c exists -> true
a.c -> 5
a.d exists -> false
a.d -> nil
```

##### `now`

A built-in PCL function that has no arguments and returns a `datetime` representing the "current" time.  For consistency during the evaluation of a complex exression, a single UTC value is determined before the entire expression is evaluated and that value is returned by this function. Could be used for the `datetime` argument in the one-time or recurring schedule conditions in Event Orchestrations.

```
now > 2020-01-01 00:00:00 Etc/UTC
now in Mon,Fri 09:00:00 to 17:00:00 America/New_York
```

> ## Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation
> 
> [Note About Warnings During Expression Evaluation]:#note-about-warnings-during-expression-evaluation
> 
> Evaluation of a PCL sub-expression can result in evaluation warnings. Since PCL will be used as part of the Event processing pipeline, throwing an error and giving up on the entire event evaluation isn't helpful since there is no user available to handle the error.
> 
> Instead, PCL accumulates and propogates the evaluation warnings and then evalulates each sub-condition as accurately as possible given the previous warnings. The final result of the PCL evaluation will be a boolean decision along with any warning messages gathered along the way.
> 
> There are two basic types of evaluation warnings: non-boolean evaluations and boolean results with evaluation warnings. 
> 
> ### Non-Boolean Evaluation
> 
> [Non-Boolean Evaluation]:#non-boolean-evaluation
> 
> These are PCL sub-expressions where the results are ambiguous / non-sensical. A classic example is an invalid type comparison like `2 > 'two'`. 
> 
> PCL treats non-boolean evaluation as a `false` [boolean response with a warning][Boolean Evaluation With Warnings].

Reviewer: **Not a blocker:** If you're accepting my other changes, above, where we remove links to the `Note About Warnings...` section, then I think we should remove that section entirely, **only** keeping the `Non-Boolean Evaluation` section, which _is_ still relevant & useful for Event Orchestration customers.

```suggestion
### Non-Boolean Evaluation

[Non-Boolean Evaluation]:#non-boolean-evaluation

Evaluation of a PCL sub-expression can produce results are ambiguous / non-sensical. A classic example is an invalid type comparison like `2 > 'two'`.

Since PCL will be used as part of the Event processing pipeline, throwing an error and giving up on the entire event evaluation isn't helpful since there is no user available to handle the error.

So PCL treats all non-boolean evaluation as a `false`, allowing the PCL expression to be evaluated consistently as a whole, without error.
```

Expression | Evaluates like | Result | Warning
-- | -- | -- | --
`2 > 'two'` | `non-boolean evaluation` | ❌ `false` | Type mismatch: `>` requires a [number] or [datetime] on both sides but got `[number] > [string]`
`not 2 > 'two'` | `not (non-boolean evaluation)` -> `not (false)` -> | ✅ `true` | Type mismatch: `>` requires a [number] or [datetime] on both sides but got `[number] > [string]`
`2 >= 'two' or 2 < 10` | `(non-boolean evaluation) or true` -> `false or true` | ✅ `true` | Type mismatch: `>=` requires a [number] or [datetime] on both sides but got `[number] >= [string]`
`2 <= 'two' and 2 < 10` | `(non-boolean evaluation) and true` -> `false and true` | ❌ `false` | Type mismatch: `<=` requires a [number] or [datetime] on both sides but got `[number] <= [string]`

> ### Boolean Evaluation With Warnings
> 
> [Boolean Evaluation With Warnings]:#boolean-evaluation-with-warnings
> 
> These are conditions that resolve to a boolean _and_ also record some warning information intended to help users understand why the evaluation happened the way it did. A classic example is using the `match` operator with a nil value on the left (this happens in the real world when the user uses a path on the left that doesn't match the given context). The `nil matches 'three'` expression returns a `false` response with the following warning message: "Type mismatch: `match` requires a non-nil value on the left"
> 
> The `or`, `and`, and `not` operators will always return a boolean result _and_ will accumulate warnings from any evaluated sub-expressions.
> 
> ```json
> {
>   "a": {
>     "status": 503,
>     "env": "production"
>   }
> }
> ```
> 
> Expression | Evaluates like | Result | Accumulated Warnings
> -- | -- | -- | --
> `a.status >= 500` | `503 >= 500` | ✅ `true` | n/a
> `not a.expected == true` | `not (false w/ warning)` | ✅ `true` | Type mismatch: `==` requires the same type on both sides but got `[nil] == [bool]`
> `not a.expected == true and a.status >= 500` | `(not (false w/ warning)) and true`<br> -> `true and true` | ✅ `true` | Type mismatch: `==` requires the same type on both sides but got `[nil] == [bool]`
> `a.expected == true or a.status matches 'staging'` | `(false w/ warning) or (false w/ warning)`<br> -> `false or false` | ❌ `false` | (2 warnings)
> `not (a.expected == true or a.httpResponseCode < 500)` | `not((false w/ warning) or (non-boolean evaluation))`<br> -> `not(false or false)` | ✅ `true` | (2 warnings)
> 

Reviewer: **Not a blocker:** If you're accepting my other changes, above, where we remove links to the Note About Warnings... section, then we should remove that section entirely.

```suggestion
```

Author: Yeah, I had that question...

When comparing an integer with a float, the following rule applies: The number that has less precision is converted to the type of the other number before the comparison occurs.
- If the floating point number is within the range `-2^53` to `2^53`, then the floating point has more precision than the integer, so the integer is converted to a float and the numbers are compared.
- If the floating point number is outside that range, then the floating point representation cannot represent contiguous integers. So, the integer will have more precision, and the floating point number is converted to an integer and the numbers are compared.

Since the floating point representation cannot represent all integers greater than `2^53`, i.e. `9007199254740992`, this leads to some awkward behavior. This is not considered a bug, but a recognized artifact of the inaccuracy of floating point in general and beyond this limit specifically. All programming languages that support floating point numbers have similar issues. Here are some examples with explanations:

```
iex> PCL.parse_and_evaluate("9007199254740992 == 9007199254740992.0", PCL.EvalContext.new())

> {:ok, {true, []}}

Author: This is definitely a mistake. I will add appropriate examples and backport.

> {:ok, {true, []}}

Author: I'll just put the conditions as they are with their return values.

```
iex> PCL.parse_and_evaluate("9007199254740992 == 9007199254740993.0", PCL.EvalContext.new())
{:ok, {true, []}}
```

What is happening here is that `9007199254740993.0` cannot be represented in the floating point representation. So, the floating point number that is chosen is the closest one that _can_ be represented. That happens to be the original number `9007199254740992.0`. The equality then just compares the two numbers which are now the same.

```
iex> PCL.parse_and_evaluate("9007199254740992 == 9007199254740994.0", PCL.EvalContext.new())
{:ok, {false, []}}
```

Again, as expected. `9007199254740994.0` is the next number that can be represented in floating point, so PCL can tell that they are not the same. Note that as the floats get larger, the gap between representable numbers also gets larger.

For more information about floating point numbers and their peculiarities:

- [What Every Programmer Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic](https://floating-point-gui.de)
- [0.30000000000000004.com](https://0.30000000000000004.com)
- [Floating Point Arithmetic: Issues and Limitations](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/floatingpoint.html)

## Additional Functions

> Event Orchestration has added additional functions that can be used in PCL condtions. These functions support `threshold conditions`, which are condition that will evaluate to `true` when that particular condition is evaluated a certain number of times within a given time period. The two different threshold conditions are `trigger_count` and `resetting_trigger_count`.

Reviewer: **Blocker:** I feel pretty strongly that `trigger_count over` and `resetting_trigger_count over` should be listed with the rest of the `Built-in Operators`. I believe the only reason they're listed separately right now is that they're implemented as a PCL custom function, which our end users don't need care about at all.

Author: Yes, this can be moved to the `Other Operations` section of `Built-in Operators`.

Author: I actually moved it to a new section before the `Other Operations` section.

raw_event.important_field matches regex exactly '(?i)this'    -> true
raw_event.important_field matches regex '(?-i)this'           -> false

raw_event.another_field matches regex '.in it'                -> true
raw_event.another_field matches regex '(?-s).in it'           -> false

raw_event.another_field matches regex '^in it'                -> true
raw_event.another_field matches regex '(?-m)^in it'           -> false
```

#### Threshold Conditions

Threshold conditions will evaluate to `true` when that particular condition is evaluated a certain number of times _recently_ within a given time period.

Note that the threshold conditions will never return `0` because the "current" event being evaluated is counted as part of the count.  Thus the lowest possible value is `1` and conditions like `trigger_count over 5 seconds < 1` should be avoided.

##### `trigger_count`

Returns a count of how many trigger events have occurred on this rule _recently_ within the giving time period

```
trigger_count over [duration]
```

Generally will be used in conjunction with a numerical operator like these examples:

```
trigger_count over 10 seconds > 5
trigger_count over 1 hour < 10
```

> ### `resetting_trigger_count`

Reviewer: Uses the wrong header type so the styling is off

```suggestion
##### `resetting_trigger_count`
```
